---
layout: post
author: Franklin Lu
title: Putnam 2017 B2
excerpt: Suppose an integer N can be expressed as a sum of 2017 consecutive positive integers, but not as a sum of any other k consecutive positive integers. What is the smallest such N?
date: 2018-09-24
math: true
---
From the 2017 Putnam:

### Q:
Suppose that a positive integer $$N$$ can be expressed as the sum of $$k$$ consecutive positive integers:

\\[ N = a + (a+1) + (a+2) + \cdots + (a+k) \\]

for $$k = 2017$$ but for no other values of $$k \gt 1$$. Considering all positive integers $$N$$ with this property, what is the smallest positive integer $$a$$ that occurs in any of these expressions?

### A:
First, we want to write an arbitrary $N$ more concisely:
\\[ N = ka + \frac{(k)(k-1)}{2} = k(a + \frac{k-1}{2})\\]

Thus, for $$k = 2017$$, we should have that any $$N$$ is a multiple of $$2017$$.

These are just preliminary observations. But the next step took some time -- did I want to think about the problem in terms of $k$, $N$, or $a$? At first, $N$ made sense, because I thought it would be possible to write $N$ as $2017x$, but that didn't really get me anywhere. It did help in thinking about the problem and playing around with how things worked, but it turns out there is actually a quite logical approach, based on considering each $k$ and iterating through all the values of $a$ to reach the possible values of $N$ obtainable from each $k$.

First, observe that, if $k=2$, then we can have values of $3, 5, 7, \dots$ by setting $a = 1, 2, 3, \dots$. This immediately tells us that any value of $N$ must be even, otherwise it could be generated by $k=2$. This provides some insight into how we might go about this problem.

Let us define some terms. If a value of $N$ be generated by some $k \neq 2017$, we call that value of $N$ *invalid*, and the opposite of that *valid*. We say a value of $k$ *invalidates* some $N$ if that value of $k$ may generate $N$ for some $a$.

If we consider even values of $k$ greater than $2$, we see that the values of $N$ that become invalidated by those $k$ are a subset of those made invalid by $k=2$, as any even $k$ will give odd values of $N$, which are all invalid already.

If we consider $k=3$, we get values of $6, 9, 12, \dots$, which are clearly just the multiples of $3$ above $6$ (this can be easily seen, given that each time you increment $a$, you increment $N$ by $ka$). This same idea works for all odd $k$, simply because of how $N$ is defined:

\\[ N = k(a + \frac{k-1}{2}) \\]

for $a = 1, 2, 3, \dots$

So, for all odd $k$, multiples of $k$ higher than $k(1 +\frac{k-1}{2})$ are all invalid. In fact, for composite numbers, invalid $N$ will have already been invalidated by an earlier odd prime, so we really only need to concern ourselves with odd primes in consideri]ng $k$.

So, how do we choose a valid $N$? I offer now a quick digression into something that I had thought of initially, although it was wrong. Multiples of $2017$ are good place to start, and perhaps we could multiply $2017$ by another large prime, $p$, such that:

\\[ N = 2017p \lt p(1 + \frac{p-1}{2}) \\]

and

\\[ 2017p \gt 2017(1 + \frac{2017-1}{2}) \\]

The idea here is to choose an odd value of $N$ that is valid and a multiple of 2017. Because it is a multiple of $2017$ that is greater than $2017$, it must be a composite number with another factor $p$. In order for $k=p$ to not invalidate this $N$, it must be that this number is lower than the cutoff, after which $k=p$ invalidates all other multiples of $p$. This means that $p$ must be some large prime. In principle, this should work, but the main problem is that, this is an obviously very large number, and there are many more valid $N$ I have not considered yet. The even numbers!

If we consider even values, the ones that aren't invalidated also have to avoid being multiples of $3, 5, 7$, and all the other odd primes. In that case, only values that are of the form $2^x \times 2017$ are valid. Thus, we can just set:

\\[ 2^x \times 2017 = 2017 (\frac{2017-1}{2} + a) \\]

\\[ 2^x = 1008 + a \\]

This final equation gives us, by the simple fact that $1024$ is a power of $2$, $a = 16$, which is the smallest value of $a$ satisfying our equation.
