---
layout: post
author: Franklin Lu
title: Riddler 9/7/2018
excerpt: If you are collecting cards from a set of size N, and you collect them in packs of c unique cards, what is the expected number of packs you will need to go through to collect them all?
date: 2018-09-12
math: true
---
The [Riddler Classic](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/id-like-to-use-my-riddler-lifeline/) for this week gives the following problem, which I have generalized:

If you are collecting cards from a set of size $$N$$, and you collect them in packs of $$c$$ unique cards, what is the expected number of packs you will need to go through to collect them all?

This immediately brings to mind the cereal box problem (set $$c = 1$$). In particular, for the cereal box problem, if you are in a state of having $$x$$ items left to collect (call this an "$$x$$ state", or just denote it by $$x$$), you can only go to two states: either you get a new item and go to $$x-1$$, or you stay at $$x$$, which means the expected value $$E[x] = f(E[x-1], E[x])$$ depends only on the $$x-1$$ state and itself, and so you can rearrange to get something that looks like $$E[x] = g(E[x-1])$$. It turns out that $$E[x] = \frac{N}{x} + E[x-1]$$, and so the value of $$E[x]$$ is just $$N$$ times the $$n$$th harmonic number (which makes sense, the expected time of getting to the next state should just be the inverse of the probability of going to the next state). I omit some calculations because we will just borrow the intuition from this solution.

The case for any $$c$$ is what we want to solve. The Riddler asks for $$c=10$$, which is how I set about thinking about it first. If each card is $$10$$ packs, then there are really $$11$$ possible outcomes when we open a pack. We can be sure that one of these events will happen: a pack will add one of $$0, 1, \dots, 10$$ new cards to our collection. So, if we have $$x$$ cards left to get, and then we open a pack, we will expect to be in one of the states $$x, x-1, \dots, x - 10$$, each weighted by their probabilities. So, we can say that:

\\[ E[X] = 1 + \sum_{y = 0}^{10}{E[X - y] P(Y = y, x)} \\]

where $$Y$$ is the R.V. for number of new cards from the pack.

Now, all we need to find are the $$P(Y = y, x)$$ values.

$$P(Y = y, x)$$ is the probability of getting exactly $$y$$ new cards if there are $$x$$ cards left to obtain from a pool of $$N$$ cards, when opening one pack of $$c$$ unique cards. We just count outcomes and divide by possibilities, which is fairly straightforward. Let $${^a C_b}$$ and $$^a P_b$$ be the notation for combinations and permutations. We have $$c$$ slots to place $$y$$ cards, or $$^c C_y$$. We have $$x$$ cards to be the first new card, $$x - 1$$ to be the second, all the way down to $$x - y + 1$$ for the $$y$$th, which is just xPy. Similarly, we have $$^{N-x} P_{c-y}$$ ways to fill in the blanks for the old cards. And, in total, we draw $$c$$ cards from a pool of $$N$$, which is $$^N P_c$$.

I used Python to calculate the values of $$E[X]$$ given $$N$$ and $$c$$. The code is fairly straightforward, using an array to store $$E[X]$$'s, and computing combinations and permutations without using closed-form factorial expressions.

For $$N = 100$$, I get a value of about $$49.95$$ packs on average to collect all the cards.
For $$N = 300$$, I get a value of about $$186.09$$ packs on average to collect all the cards.

Earlier, I also misread the question and failed to see it was $$10$$ unique cards, and so I tried to solve that problem where packs could double up on cards. The values of $$P(y, x)$$ are a lot harder to calculate, but I think the problem could just be reformulated as treating each card as a separate pack of $$c = 1$$, and just multiplying all expected values by $$10$$, which we know how to solve in principle. The one problem arises when we get to low values of $$x$$, namely when computing $$E[1], \dots , E[10]$$. Then, we can't treat each pack as $$10$$ separate cards because there is a chance that if $$x = 10$$, we just open $$10$$ brand new cards right away. I wonder if there is an elegant way to calculate $$P(y,x)$$'s or if computing $$E[1], \dots , E[10]$$ should just be done by brute force using Python for this related problem.

Well, I think I will just wonder about that, because I don't want to think about it anymore.

[Code](https://github.com/slowtyper77/Misc/blob/master/RiddlerCards.py)