---
layout: post
author: John Zhao
title: "Putnam 2018 A1: Learning Algebra (Again)"
excerpt: Find all pairs of positive integers such that the sum of the reciprocals of the two integers equals 3/2018
math: true
---

### Q:

Find all ordered pairs $$(a, b)$$ of positive integers such that

\\[ \frac{1}{a} + \frac{1}{b} = \frac{3}{2018} \\]

### A:

I honestly threw the entire kitchen sink at this problem (to generally no avail) for a solid two weeks. I suppose this is less of a surprise and more of a running theme of this blog. My excuse this time is that I haven't worked with divisibility relations in a long long time, and thus I had to learn/prove how to manipulate them from scratch. None of the things I discovered are crazy or hard; they're just basic things I haven't been used to thinking about. It's funny because we always joke about how the mathematicians of ancient times got famous for grabbing all the low hanging mathematical fruit. Sometimes I wonder, though, how far I could have to taken the field of basic (i.e. middle school) algebra or number theory if I just started proving things from the ground up, fueled solely by my curiosity and resourcefulness. Sometimes I feel like I wouldn't have gotten very far at all.

We will establish two (honestly trivial) lemmas, and that'll be all we'll need to solve this problem.

#### Lemma 1

For any integer $$k$$, if $$a \mid b$$ then $$a \mid bk$$

#### Proof Lemma 1

I generally try not to use the phrase "This is obvious" in my proofs, but this lemma should indeed be obvious. 

#### Lemma 2

For any integer $$k$$, if $$a \mid b$$ then $$a \mid b + ak$$

#### Proof Lemma 2

This lemma should also be obvious, but for completion: $$a \mid b$$ is equivalent to saying there exists an integer $$j$$ such that $$b = aj$$. Thus

\\[ b + ak = aj + ak = a(j+k) \\]

which implies that $$b + ak$$ is divisible by $$a$$.

#### Solving the Problem

Suppose $$a$$ and $$b$$ are positive integers such that

\\[ \frac{1}{a} + \frac{1}{b} = \frac{3}{2018} \\]

We can assume WLOG that $$a \leq b$$, since the problem is symmetric in $$a$$ and $$b$$. Since $$a$$ and $$b$$ are positive integers, we can thus bound $$a$$ as follows:

\\[ \frac{1}{2} \cdot \frac{3}{2018} \leq \frac{1}{a} \leq \frac{3}{2018} \\]

since $$a \leq b$$ implies that $$\frac{1}{a} \geq \frac{1}{b}$$ which implies that $$\frac{1}{a}$$ should make up at least half of $$\frac{3}{2018}$$. On the other hand, $$\frac{1}{a}$$ can't be more than $$\frac{3}{2018}$$. Taking the reciprocals of the inequalities, we get

\\[ 672\frac{2}{3} \leq a \leq 1345\frac{1}{3} \\]

which means we can restrict our search space to

\\[ 673 \leq a \leq 1345 \\]

From our original sum equation, we can solve for $$b$$:

\\[ \frac{3}{2018} = \frac{1}{a} + \frac{1}{b} = \frac{a + b}{ab} \\]

\\[ \Rightarrow 3ab = 2018(a+b) \\]

\\[ \Rightarrow (3a - 2018)b = 2018a \\]

\\[ \Rightarrow b = \frac{2018a}{3a - 2018} \\]

Since $$b$$ is an integer, we must have that the RHS is also an integer, i.e.

\\[ 3a - 2018 \mid 2018a \\]

Using Lemma 2, we can multiply the RHS by $$3$$:

\\[ 3a - 2018 \mid 3 \cdot 2018a \\]

Using Lemma 1, we can subtract $$2018(3a - 2018)$$ from the RHS:

\\[ 3a - 2018 \mid 3 \cdot 2018a - 2018(3a - 2018) = 3 \cdot 2018a - 2018 \cdot 3a + 2018^2 = 2018^2 \\]

In other words, $$3a - 2018$$ must be a factor of $$2018^2$$.

The prime factorization of $$2018^2$$ is $$2^2 \cdot 1009^2$$, so the candidates for $$3a - 2018$$ are: $$1, 2, 4, 1009, 2 \cdot 1009, 4 \cdot 1009, 1009^2, 2 \cdot 1009^2, 4 \cdot 1009^2$$.

$$3a - 2018 = 1$$ gives us the solution $$a = 673$$.

$$3a - 2018 = 2$$ has no integer solution.

$$3a - 2018 = 4$$ gives us the solution $$a = 674$$.

$$3a - 2018 = 1009$$ gives us the solution $$a = 1009$$.

$$3a - 2018 = 2 \cdot 1009$$ has no integer solution.

$$3a - 2018 = 4 \cdot 1009$$ gives us the solution $$a = 2018$$.

Here we can actually stop, since, as we noted before, we can restrict our search space for $$a$$ to $$a \leq 1345$$. Thus our final set of solutions is simply

\\[ (673, 673 \cdot 2018), (674, 337 \cdot 1009), (1009, 2018) \\]

Of course, the flipped version of each of the pairs above works too. 
