---
layout: post
author: Franklin Lu
title: "Putnam 2019 B6: Will it Tessellate?"
excerpt: Transforming a problem involving the integer lattice in n-dimensions to a tessellation problem.
math: true
date: 2020-01-27
---

### Q:

Let $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$ be the integer lattice in $$\mathbb{R}^n$$. Two points in $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$ are called neighbors if they differ by exactly 1 in one coordinate and are equal in all other coordinates. For which integers $$n \geq 1$$ does there exist a set of points $$S \subset \mathbb{Z}^n$$ satisfying the following two conditions?

1. If $$p$$ is in $$S$$, then none of the neighbors of $$p$$ is in $$S$$.
2. If $$p \in \mathbb{Z}^n$$ is not in $$S$$, then exactly one of the neighbors of $$p$$ is in $$S$$.



### A:

#### Remark:
If we can prove that a cross shape tessellates $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$, then we satisfy conditions for a set S.

#### Proof:

To satisfy condition 1, we can form around every point in $$S$$ a set of $$2n + 1$$ points not in $$S$$, calling the $$2n + 1 $$ points the $$\textit{spikes}$$ and the point in $$S$$ the $$\textit{center}$$ for obvious reasons. We will call this shape a $$\textit{cross}$$, based on the $$n=2$$ case.  We note that, as long as the spikes touch points not in S besides the center, then condition 2 is satisfied for all points in the cross. We also note that, no point in the cross can cause another point outside of it to neighbor a point in S, which means that a tessellation of crosses would satisfy both conditions. Then, this problem becomes a question of tessellating $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$ with crosses.

Consider in $$\mathbb{Z}^n$$, with coordinates $$x_1, ...., x_n$$. Consider the line $$x_2 = ... = x_n = 0$$, and see what happens along this line. First, we must have at some point a point in S, let us say at the origin, W.L.O.G. Now, we have the point immediately before it and immediately after it as the two spikes along the $$x_1$$ axis. Now, expecting the density to be $$\frac{1}{2n +1}$$, we try to find if there are $$2(n-1)$$ points we can place along this line before reaching the same pattern. In fact, we can. Each point along the line represents a spike from another center, only offset by 1 in another one of the $$n-1$$ dimensions. Denote by $$x_i^+$$ the spike from the center which has $$x_i = 1$$ and by $$x_i^-$$ the center which has $$x_i = -1$$. $$x_i^+$$ can intuitively be thought of as the spike from the center "above" the line $$x_2 = ... = x_n = 0$$ in terms of the coordinate $$x_i$$. Also, note that $$x_1^+$$ and $$x_1^-$$ are already defined, simply as the points to the left and right of the origin. Also, let us define $$x_0$$ as the center point in our sequence.

Now, the question is, does this line tessellate? Consider going from the line $$x_2 = ... = x_n = 0$$ to $$x_j = 1, x_2 = ... = x_{j-1} = x_{j+1} = ... = x_n = 0$$, incrementing the $$x_j$$ coordinate by 1. Our same tessellation should hold, but it will be shifted. However, we also must note that the $$x_j = 0$$ center is where the $$x_j^-$$ spike is, simply by definition. Also, the $$x_j^+$$ spike is now where the $$x_j = 1$$ center is. In short, we should see that $$x_j^- \rightarrow x_0$$, $$x_0 \rightarrow x_j^+$$.

W.L.O.G, assume $$j = 2$$. 

Now, we have so far, we have in our sequence, $$x_1^-, x_0, x_1^+, ...$$, where there are $$2(n-1)$$ terms to fill in. First, let us rewrite so that $$x_1^-$$ appears at the end, as the sequence should repeat anyways. Then, let us place $$x_2^\pm$$ such that they satisfy the conditions so far. We have:

\\[x_0, x_1^+, x_2^+, ... , x_2^-, x_1^-\\]

Turns, out, this is all we need. We can see that, if we shift this by 2 to the right, we have:

\\[x_2^+, ... , x_2^-, x_1^-, x_0, x_1^+\\]

Which satisfies our one constraint. This holds for the line with $$x_2 = -1$$ as well, which has $$x_2^+ \rightarrow x_0$$, $$x_0 \rightarrow x_2^-$$, only now we have shifted to the left by 2:

\\[x_2^-, x_1^-, x_0, x_1^+, x_2^+, ... \\]

By the same argument, taking one step in each direction, we have:

\\[x_0, x_1^+, x_2^+, ..., x_n^+, x_n^-, ... , x_2^-, x_1^-\\]

Now, this tessellates in every direction, but we also should show that this tessellation is self-consistent. That is, if we go increment $$x_i$$, then $$x_j$$, do we get the same result as if we increment $$x_j$$ then $$xi$$?

By construction, we do. Each time we increase the $$x_i$$ coordinate by $$\pm1$$, we shift the tessellation by $$\pm i$$. In fact, if we place a center $$x_0$$ at $$(0,0)$$, and we have the sequence: $$x_0, x_1^+, x_2^+, ..., x_n^+, x_n^-, ... , x_2^-, x_1^-$$ along the $$x_1$$-axis, then we have that other line $$x_2 =k_2, ..., x_n = k_n$$ is shifted by exactly:

\\[\sum i k_i\\]

This also allows us to explicitly give the set of all centers, which is precisely the set S. To clean up the notation, let the point $$k = (x_1 = k_1, x_2 =k_2, ..., x_n = k_n)$$, and let $$f(k) = \sum i k_i$$. Then, we have:

\\[ S = \lbrace k \in \mathbb{Z}^n  \;  \vert  \;  f(k) = 0\pmod{2n + 1} \rbrace \\]

#### Short Addendum

(By John Zhao, who could not resist adding this because once we have the construction, the proof of the question is actually three sentences.)

Define

\\[ S = \lbrace p \in \mathbb{Z}^n \mid f(p) \equiv 0 \pmod{2n + 1} \rbrace \\]

Then Condition 1 is true because given $$p \in S$$ and any neighbor $$p'$$ of $$p$$ that differs by $$\pm 1$$ from $$p$$ in the $$i$$th direction, we have

\\[ f(p') = f(p) \pm i \equiv \pm i \not\equiv 0 \pmod{2n + 1} \\]

since $$i \in \lbrace 1, 2, ..., n \rbrace$$.

Condition 2 is true because given any $$p'$$ not in $$S$$, we know that $$f(p)$$ has nonzero residual $$\pmod{2n + 1}$$, and there exists a unique integer $$i \in \lbrace \pm 1, \pm 2, ..., \pm n \rbrace $$ such that $$f(p') + i \equiv 0$$, which identifies the unique neighbor of $$p'$$ that is in $$S$$.