---
layout: post
author: John Zhao
title: "Putnam 2018 B4: Surprises Inside Surprises"
excerpt: Prove that a given recursively defined sequence is periodic
math: true
date: 2020-02-02
---

### Q:

Given a real number $$a$$, we define a sequence by $$x_0 = 1, x_1 = x_2 = a$$ and $$x_{n+1} = 2 x_n x_{n−1} − x_{n−2}$$ for $$n \geq 2$$. Prove that if $$x_n = 0$$ for some $$n$$, then the sequence is periodic.

### A:

2020 is the year we take down problems like Freeze Tag and various Putnam 6's. Hope and determination abound. In a time like this, a Putnam 4 seems almost too easy. This one is nice, though, and it comes with a very sweet finish, if I do say so myself.

We begin this problem by trying to just get a feel for what the sequence looks like. For a given $$a$$, the first few terms are:

\\[ x_0 = 1 \\]
\\[ x_1 = a \\]
\\[ x_2 = a \\]
\\[ x_3 = 2a^2 - 1 \\]
\\[ x_4 = 4a^3 - 3a \\]

I definitely went about trying many things before I stumbled upon the actual solution, so I don't claim that I saw this the first time around. However, there is something rather familiar and suggestive about $$x_3$$ and $$x_4$$. If you are familiar with trig identities, you will notice that these are, in fact, the expansions of the cosine double and triple angle formulas. Namely

\\[ \cos{2 \theta} = 2\cos^2 \theta - 1 \\]
\\[ \cos{3 \theta} = 4\cos^3 \theta - 3\cos \theta \\]

Thus it probably would behoove us to perform some kind of $$a = \cos \theta$$ substitution, if we are allowed to do so. We will first prove that we are indeed allowed.

#### Remark 1

If $$\lvert a \rvert \gt 1$$, then the sequence will never generate a value of $$0$$.

#### Proof Remark 1

We will prove using induction that if $$\lvert a \rvert \gt 1$$, then $$\lvert x_{n+1} \rvert \gt \lvert x_n \rvert \gt 1$$ for all $$n \geq 2$$.

For the base case, we note that

\\[ \lvert x_3 \rvert = \lvert 2a^2 - 1 \rvert = 2a^2 - 1 \gt 2a^2 - \lvert a \rvert = \lvert a \rvert(2\lvert a \rvert - 1) \gt \lvert a \rvert (2\lvert a \rvert - \lvert a \rvert) = a^2 \gt \lvert a \rvert = \lvert x_2 \rvert \\]

For the inductive step, we have

\\[ \lvert x_{n+1} \rvert = \lvert 2 x_n x_{n-1} - x_{n-2} \rvert \\]
\\[ \gt \lvert 2 x_n x_{n-1} \rvert - \lvert x_{n-2} \rvert \\]
\\[ \gt \lvert 2 x_n x_{n-1} \rvert - \lvert x_{n-1} \rvert \\]
\\[ = \lvert x_{n-1} \rvert (2 \lvert x_n \rvert - 1) \\]
\\[ \gt \lvert x_{n-1} \rvert (2 \lvert x_n \rvert - \lvert x_n \rvert) \\]
\\[ = \lvert x_{n-1} \rvert \lvert x_n \rvert \gt \lvert x_n \rvert \\]

which completes the proof.

Remark 1 tells us that if $$a$$ satisfies $$x_n = 0$$, then $$\lvert a \rvert \lt 1$$, which means that we can, in fact, make the substitution

\\[ a = \cos \theta \\]

for some $$\theta \in [0, 2\pi)$$. This is where the magic happens.

#### Remark 2

Let $$a = \cos \theta$$ for some $$\theta \in [0, 2\pi)$$. Then for all $$n$$, we have

$$x_n = \cos (F_n \theta)$$

where $$F_n$$ is the $$n$$th Fibonacci number ($$F_0 = 0, F_1 = 1, F_2 = 1, ...$$).

#### Proof Remark 2

Once again, we will use induction. The base case is true by how we defined the sequence:

\\[ x_0 = 1 = \cos 0 = \cos (F_0 \theta) \\]
\\[ x_1 = a = \cos \theta = \cos (F_1 \theta) \\]
\\[ x_2 = a = \cos \theta = \cos (F_2 \theta) \\]

For the inductive step, all we need are a few elementary trig identities, namely:

\\[ \cos (\alpha + \beta) = \cos \alpha \cos \beta - \sin \alpha \sin \beta \\]
\\[ \cos 2 \alpha = 2 \cos^2 \alpha - 1 \\]
\\[ \sin 2 \alpha = 2 \sin \alpha \cos \alpha \\]

We have, for all $$n \geq 2$$:

\\[ x_{n+1} = 2 x_n x_{n-1} - x_{n-2} = 2 \cos (F_n \theta) \cos (F_{n-1} \theta) - \cos (F_{n-2} \theta) \\]
\\[ = 2 \cos (F_{n-1}\theta + F_{n-2}\theta) \cos (F_{n-1}\theta) - \cos (F_{n-2} \theta)  \\]
\\[ = 2 \left [ \cos (F_{n-1}\theta) \cos (F_{n-2}\theta) - \sin (F_{n-1}\theta) \sin (F_{n-2}\theta) \right ] \cos (F_{n-1}\theta) - \cos (F_{n-2} \theta) \\]
\\[ = 2 \cos^2 (F_{n-1}\theta) \cos (F_{n-2}\theta) - 2 \sin (F_{n-1}\theta) \sin (F_{n-2}\theta) \cos (F_{n-1}\theta) - \cos (F_{n-2} \theta) \\]
\\[ = 2 \cos^2 (F_{n-1}\theta) \cos (F_{n-2}\theta) - \sin (2F_{n-1}\theta) \sin (F_{n-2}\theta) - \cos (F_{n-2} \theta) \\]
\\[ = [ 2 \cos^2 (F_{n-1}\theta) - 1] \cos (F_{n-2}\theta) - \sin (2F_{n-1}\theta) \sin (F_{n-2}\theta) \\]
\\[ = \cos (2F_{n-1}\theta) \cos (F_{n-2}\theta) - \sin (2F_{n-1}\theta) \sin (F_{n-2}\theta) \\]
\\[ = \cos (2F_{n-1}\theta + F_{n-2}\theta) = \cos (F_{n-1}\theta + F_{n-1}\theta + F_{n-2}\theta) = \cos (F_{n-1}\theta + F_{n}\theta) = \cos (F_{n+1}\theta) \\]

which completes the induction.

Remark 2 is the crux of the problem, and once we have this observation, the proof of periodicity is a natural side effect from the periodicity of the $$\cos$$ function.

Let the real number $$a$$ satisfy $$x_n = 0$$, for some $$n$$. By Remark 1, we can make the substitution $$a = \cos \theta$$, and by Remark 2, we have

\\[ 0 = x_n = \cos (F_n\theta) \\]

which implies that $$F_n\theta = \frac{\pi}{2} + m\pi$$ for some integer $$m$$, which we can rearrange into $$\theta = \frac{\left(\frac{1}{2} + m \right)\pi}{F_n}$$.

Since $$\cos$$ has period $$2\pi$$, the problem boils down to an examination of the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0} \pmod{4F_n}$$. More precisely, we note that if

\\[ F_k \equiv F_j \pmod{4F_n} \\]

then we can write $$F_j = F_k + t4F_n$$ for some integer $$t$$. Then

\\[ x_j = \cos (F_j\theta) = \cos (F_k\theta + t4F_n\theta) \\]
\\[ = \cos \left (F_k\theta + t4F_n \cdot \frac{\left(\frac{1}{2} + m \right)\pi}{F_n} \right) \\]
\\[ = \cos (F_k\theta + t2\pi + tm4\pi) \\]
\\[ = \cos (F_k\theta) = x_k \\]

This fact that $$F_k \equiv F_j \pmod{4F_n} \implies x_k = x_j$$ is the heart of our periodicity. If we can prove that the sequence of Fibonacci numbers $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0} \pmod{4F_n}$$ is periodic, then we will have also proven that the sequence $$\lbrace x_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0}$$ is periodic as well.

#### Remark 3

The sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace \pmod N$$ is periodic for any positive integer $$N$$.

#### Proof Remark 3

We first note that any tail of the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace \pmod N$$ is uniquely determined by its first two elements. In other words, if we are given the values of $$F_i$$ and $$F_{i+1}$$, then $$F_j$$ is uniquely determined for all $$j > i+1$$. This is observed from the Fibonacci recurrence $$F_n = F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}$$, which only takes in account the previous two terms when generating the next term.

Specifically, if there exist $$i$$ and $$j$$ such that $$F_i \equiv F_j, F_{i+1} \equiv F_{j+1} \pmod N$$, then we know that the sequence must be eventually periodic with period $$j - i$$, since in this case we know that the consecutive elements $$F_i, F_{i+1}$$ generate a sequence which generates $$F_i, F_{i+1}$$, which means it'll generate the same sequence infinitely.

But there are only $$N$$ unique residuals $$\pmod N$$, which means that there are only $$N (N-1)$$ unique ordered pairs of residuals $$\pmod N$$. Consider the first $$N (N-1) + 1$$ terms of the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace \pmod N$$. By the pidgeonhole principle, there must exist $$i, j$$ such that 

\\[ 0 \leq i \lt j \leq N (N-1) \\]

and 

\\[ F_i \equiv F_j, F_{i+1} \equiv F_{j+1} \\] 

Thus the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace \pmod N$$ is eventually periodic with period $$j - i$$.

WLOG assume $$i$$ is the smallest integer that satisfies the above periodicity conditions. To show that the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0} \pmod N$$ is fully periodic, we need to show $$i = 0$$, i.e. the periodic behavior begins with the first element in the sequence.

Consider $$\lbrace R_k \rbrace$$, the Reverse Fibonacci sequence, defined by the recurrence

\\[ R_n = R_{n-2} - R_{n-1} \\]

Intuitively, $$\lbrace R_k \rbrace$$ is the sequence generated by reading the Fibonacci sequence in reverse, since it is easy to show that if $$R_0 = F_M, R_1 = F_{M-1}$$, then $$R_i = F_{M-i}$$ for all $$0 \leq i \leq M$$. As with the Fibonacci sequence, tails of this sequence are uniquely determined by their first two terms.

Let $$R_0 = F_{j+1}, R_1 = F_j$$, where $$i$$ and $$j$$ are the indices defined above. Then $$\lbrace R_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0} \pmod N$$ is fully periodic, since we have $$R_{j-i} = F_{i+1} = F_{j+1} = R_0, R_{j-1+1} = F_i = F_j = R_1$$.

But $$\lbrace R_k \rbrace$$ generates $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace$$ in reverse, which means it must generate the beginning of $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace$$, namely $$F_0$$ and $$F_1$$. This means that $$F_0$$ and $$F_1$$ are elements in the fully periodic part of the $$\lbrace R_k \rbrace$$, which means that they must be part of the fully periodic part of $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace$$, which implies that $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace_{k \geq 0} \pmod N$$ is fully periodic.

#### Finishing Touches

Thus the sequence $$\lbrace F_k \rbrace \pmod{4F_n}$$ is fully periodic, meaning there exists an integer $$T$$ such that for all $$k \geq 0$$,

\\[ F_{k+T} \equiv F_k \pmod{4F_n} \\]

which implies

\\[ x_{k+T} = \cos (F_{k+T}\theta) = \cos (F_k\theta) = x_k \\]
